COMP 155 - Web Design and Programming
Instructor: Daniel Chamberlain, PhD
Contact: chamberlain@oxy.edu
Twitter: @ddchamberlain  Course hashtag: #webmaking155
Brown Lab (Library) Tuesday 10:05-11:30
Office Hours: Monday + Thursday 9:00-10am, NW corner of main floor of Library 

http://cdlrsandbox.org/chamberlain/images/webmaking.png

Course Description

This course will introduce and critically situate the concepts required to design, build, and program an interactive web site. We will begin the course by reviewing the histories and technical foundations of the Internet, the World Wide Web, and practices of web design. As we work through the fundamentals of of markup, styling, and programming, we will also explore concepts of prototyping, interaction, user experience, and responsive design. During the course of the semester we will explore tools for analyzing code, practice building pages from scratch, and will learn how to hack existing platforms. With a fundamental understanding of the history and practice of web design in place, we will further develop our skills through collaborative project work aimed at producing a set of live web sites. This synthetic approach to webmaking will allow students to develop a critical understanding of this fundamental medium, a facility with the methods and techniques of web design, and an appreciation for the computational and algorithmic systems the underlie modern technological (and social) systems.

Course Goals
1. to learn to code for the web
2. to practice the standards of web design 
3. to creatively experiment with webmaking languages
4. to produce exemplary websites as part of collaborative project teams 

Suggested Readings/Resources
	We will assign reading and share resources as the semester progresses, most of which will be freely available on the web. The following texts will be very helpful for working more systematically through the process of webmaking.
	Julie Meloni, Sams Teach Yourself HTML, CSS, and JavaScript
	Jesse James Garrett, The Elements of User Experience

Schedule

Unit 1: Fundamentals 

Meeting One: September 2, 2014
	Course Overview
	Histories of Internet, Web, Web Design
	Introduction to HTML
	Assignment #1

Meeting Two: September 9, 2014
	Review assignment #1
	Introduction to Styling, CSS
	Introduction web publishing methods: Servers and domains
	Introduction to Reclaim Hosting
	Assignment #2

Meeting Three: September 16, 2014
	Review assignment #2
	Introduction to project planning
	Review of Wireframes, User Experience
	Assignment #3

Meeting Four: September 23, 2014
	Review Assignment #3
	Additional web publishing methods/platforms: Content Management Systems
	Assignment #4

Meeting Five: September 30, 2014
	Review Assignment #4
	Interaction, responsive and mobile-first design
	Client-side vs. Server-side programming 
	
Unit 2: Projects 

Meeting Six: October 7, 2014
	Scoping the Project
	Gathering Requirements
	
Meeting Seven: October 21, 2014
	Sketching, Storyboarding. Wireframing
	
Meeting Eight: October 29, 2014
	Usability Testing & Refinement
	Project Management

Meeting Nine: November 4, 2014
	Project check-in, review, and rotation
	Coding: Divide & Conquer

Meeting Ten: November 11, 2014
	Coding

Meeting Eleven: November 18, 2014 
	Testing
	
Unit 3: Wrap Up and Reflections

Meeting Twelve: November 25, 2014
	Closing the Project

Meeting Thirteen: December 2, 2014
	Reflections


Course Policies

Accessibility, Disability, and Ability 
Accessibility is an important civil rights issue, and the college has designed a system to support students with a range of abilities. As with any class at Occidental, if you require any particular accommodations to make this course more accessible to you, you must follow college policy, register with Occidental’s Disability Services department, and present your accommodation letter to the instructor at the beginning of the semester or as soon as possible thereafter. Any student who experiences significant physical or mental impairments may contact Disability Services at (323) 259-2969 to learn about available services and support. More information is available at http://www.oxy.edu/disability-services. 

In this course, we will also discuss issues of accessibility as important concepts of web design, and will give significant consideration to how different individuals and groups might interact with the media we are producing.

Academic Conduct and Plagiarism
As you know, Occidental has a stated description of Academic Ethics and Academic Misconduct. You are encouraged to familiarize yourself with the articulation of these policies in the Student Handbook ( http://www.oxy.edu/student-handbook/academic-ethics ). 

As web design often involves both collaboration and the reuse of existing resources, we will discuss in class what ethical and citational frameworks are appropriate for this type of creative work. You will be expected to abide by the policies in the handbook but we will work to collectively understand how these academic policies line up with webmaking practices. 

Late work
Late assignments are not allowed. This course will move quickly from concept to concept and it is imperative that you complete assignments on time in order to build a successful foundation for the rest of the course. If a project is late without making arrangements prior to the due date, it will be penalized by 1 grade point (e.g. an A becomes a B) for each day of lateness.

Grading 
	Weekly assignments: 25%
	Attendance and participation: 25%
	Effort and quality of work at early project check-in: 20%
	Effort and quality of work on final project: 30%

Writing support
Although this course is not especially writing intensive, you might nonetheless wish to take advantage of the services offered by the College’s Center for Academic Excellence ( http://www.oxy.edu/center-academic-excellence ) and, specifically, the CAE’s Writing Center ( http://www.oxy.edu/center-academic-excellence/writing-center )
